# mainnet-observer

This tool and website provides protocol-level statistics and insights about Bitcoin: blocks, transactions, script usage and more.
Powered by a Rust backend and Hugo-based frontend.

## Prerequisites

- a Bitcoin Core node with the full chain (not pruned) and the REST API enabled (start with `-rest` or add `rest=1` to bitcoin.conf)
- development tools `rustc`, `cargo`, and `hugo` installed or use the provided `nix-shell`

## Backend (in `./backend`)

The backend connects to a Bitcoin Core node and fetches blocks. For each block, stats are generated and written
into a sqlite database. Once all blocks are processed, the stats are aggregated and written into CSV files.

Example usage:

```
cargo run -- --rest-host 127.0.0.1 --rest-port 8332 --database-path .stats.db --csv-path ./csv
```

Note that a full run on mainnet will take multiple hours. The following runs will be incremental and
will only need to fetch new blocks.

```
Usage: mainnet-observer-backend [OPTIONS]

Options:
      --rest-host <REST_HOST>          Host part of the Bitcoin Core REST API endpoint [default: localhost]
      --rest-port <REST_PORT>          Port part of the Bitcoin Core REST API endpoint [default: 8332]
      --database-path <DATABASE_PATH>  Path to the SQLite database file where the stats are stored [default: ./db.sqlite]
      --csv-path <CSV_PATH>            Path where the CSV files should be written to [default: ./csv]
      --no-csv                         Flag to disable CSV file writing
      --no-stats                       Flag to disable stat generation
  -h, --help                           Print help
  -V, --version                        Print version
```

## Frontend (in `./frontend`)

The frontend consists of a [Hugo](gohugo.io) based site that's deployable as static HTML site.
The CSV files generated by the backend need to be copied to `frontend/static/csv` for development builds
or to `frontend/public/static/csv` after `hugo build`.

For development, Hugo can be used to launch an auto-refreshing websever with `hugo server --buildDrafts`.
It will display the URL its serving the page on. A production deployment can use `hugo build` to generate
a static HTML page in `public`. See the hugo tool for more build options.

To set the site title, base URL, and fill in some of the placeholders, either edit `frontend/config.toml`
or set the following ENV variables.

```
export HUGO_TITLE="mainnet-observer"
export HUGO_BASEURL="https://mainnet.observer/"
export HUGO_PARAMS_HTMLTOPRIGHT="HTML that appears in the <b>top right</b> corner"
export HUGO_PARAMS_HTMLBOTTOMRIGHT="HTML that appears in the <b>bottom right</b> corner"
```

## Nix package and NixOS module

There exists a Nix package and a NixOS module for mainnet-observer in https://github.com/0xb10c/nix.
See the [integration-test](https://github.com/0xB10C/nix/blob/master/tests/mainnet-observer.nix) for
an example usage of the frontend and backend.
